# 0.0 Learning TypeScript

- TypeScript is designed to be compiled into fully compatible JavaScript
- TypeScript's tooling is fully cross-platform, which means that can develop TypeScript applications using Windows, Mac, or even Lynx.
- Microsoft even offers an online editor in order to get your feet wet without having to install anything at all. We've got a lot to cover.

# 0.1 Why TypeScript?

- JavaScript is an amazing language. It's been around for over several decades, and it's everywhere, from your browser to the server. It even runs some refrigerators.
- JavaScript is also a dynamic language, which means that it is very forgiving in how it allows you to define and use variables.
- For example, you made decide to create a variable and assign it to a string value, then reassign that same variable to a complex type that you define on the spot, and then go ahead and add properties to that object. JavaScript allows it all.
  ```ts
  let myVar = 'Hello!';
  myVar = { name: 'Awesome user' };
  myVar.birthdate = new Date('2000-01-01');
  ```
- In fact, that's the beauty of the language, but JavaScript's dynamic and forgiving nature is both a great thing, allowing you to do virtually anything you want, and a bad thing, allowing you to make all the mistakes you want as well.
- For example, take a look at this piece of code.

  ```ts
  let name = 'Ada Lovelace';
  getUzer('ada').then((u) => (name = u));
  function getUzer(userId) {
    //...
  }
  ```

  There are at least three errors in just these three lines of code. All of them will break my application at runtime, and only really one of them is obvious enough to find just by looking at this code.

- In other words, my app is broken, and I'm not going to find out about it until it's running. At this point you might be a little confused. Perhaps thinking that maybe the wrong course started playing. If this is a course about TypeScript, why am I talking about JavaScript? Well, I'm talking about JavaScript because TypeScript is designed to catch exactly these kinds of problems in your JavaScript code.
- TypeScript adds strong static typing on top of JavaScript, which means that it's able to provide compile time code checking that will not only catch many common issues before you even run your code, but will also help you write your code by providing first-class in-line documentation and guidance.
- But perhaps the most important thing is that TypeScript is a superset of JavaScript, which means that it extends the JavaScript language with all of this additional goodness, rather than creating a whole new language. Plus, once all is said and done, TypeScript code compiles down to JavaScript. So anywhere that you would use JavaScript, you can use TypeScript, after you compile it at least.
- In other words, TypeScript is JavaScript. So if you already know JavaScript, then you're already well on your way to knowing TypeScript. So just keep watching and I'll show you everything you need to know in order to take advantage of this powerful language.

Summary:

- Catch errors at compile time vs. runtime.
- Better tooling: refactoring, autocomplete, etc.
  - Avoid several classes of errors "for free"
- Explicitly express intent
  - Write code for humans, not for computers.
- A typed superset of JavaScript
  - Adds helpful and productive features without changing JavaScript
  - Built for large applications, but great for applications of any size

# 0.2 Sample code and other online resources

- TypeScript was created and is maintained by Microsoft, which means that it has always had great documentation.
- However, I've elected not to show you some of the most advanced or complicated parts of TypeScript, parts that I have not really had a need for in my regular development. So, I expect you won't either. More importantly, both JavaScript and TypeScript continue to evolve and you'll want to keep up.
- No matter what the reason, if you're looking for more information about TypeScript, you'll find it at [typescriptlang.org](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) .
- As for the code you'll see me write throughout this course, I've captured a snapshot of it at the end of every video, and it's available to you in two ways. Your first option is to download the exercise file as one big archive file on this website.
- The second option to get access to the source code is through my GitHub repository for this course [typescript-EssT-2428199](https://github.com/LinkedInLearning/typescript-EssT-2428199).
- You can find it at the link shown on your screen and in the course notes. In the main branch of this repository, you'll find all of the exercise file in a folder structure that mirrors the exercise files zip archive.
- In addition to that, I've also created a branch for every video that has code. The branches are structured to correspond to the videos in the course following the naming convention used to name the folders in the zip archive. So, for the beginning state of chapter two, video three, you would select the 02_03 branch. If you're familiar with the Git source control system, or you're just interested in looking at the files in a browser, I highly recommend the GitHub option.
- However, if you're unfamiliar with Git, or you prefer to have the source code for all of the videos downloaded once and available immediately, then feel free to download the exercise files directly from the training website. Either way, the full source code is there if you need it.
