# 1.1 Installing Typescript
- nodejs.org/en
- [Install link](https://www.typescriptlang.org/download)
- Globally Installing TypeScript
    - npm install -g typescript
- Check the version
    - npx tsc -v

# 1.2 Adding TypeScript to an existing solution

- You need to configure TypeScript in your application. If you're using an editor that has built-in support for TypeScript, such as Visual Studio Code, like I'm using here, the only thing you'll need to add is the TypeScript configuration file to the root of your application's code base. This file is called tsconfig.json. There are plenty of configuration options available but I'm going to start with just one: include.
- And I'll supply it a parameter of the paths to the files that I'd like to include. Here I'm telling it to look for all of the files under the src or source folder under this current folder. This defines the scope of this TypeScript project.

    ```ts
    "include": ["src/**/*"]
    ```
- Now I can save this file and run the TypeScript compiler to see what happens. And I see the output no inputs were found in config file, which means that the compiler didn't find any files to compile. So let's create one now.
- First, I'll create that src or source folder that I mentioned earlier. And then I'll create a new TypeScript file, which is just a file with the .ts extension. Then I'll add some JavaScript to it. Now if I run that tsc command again, I'll see there's no output, which actually means that everything ran just fine. How do I know? Well, if I look in the src folder, I now see two files, the demo.ts file that I created and the new demo.js file that's the output of TypeScript's compilation process. If I open up this new file, I can see that TypeScript has taken my code and transpiled it down into JavaScript that is more compatible with a wider variety of browsers and runtimes.
- In fact, you're able to control which JavaScript version TypeScript targets in the tsconfig file. You can find almost all of the TypeScript settings in the compilerOptions section. The option I'm most interested in right now is the target option. As you can see here, this option defaults to ES3, which stands for ECMAScript version 3. As of the time of this recording, the majority of browsers in use today support ECMAScript 6 or ES6, so that's usually a great choice. Now when I run the tsc command again, and I inspect the output, I can see the JavaScript that TypeScript has emitted has changed. Since ES6 supports the class keyword natively, TypeScript knows that there is no conversion to be done and simply writes the class out as is. It can also tell that the three properties I defined on the class were never used. So it knows that it's safe to strip them out from the final output.
    ```ts
    "compilerOptions": {
            "target": "ES6",
        },
    ````

- TypeScript's default behavior is to render JavaScript files right next to the TypeScript files. However, if TypeScript is the only tool you'll be using, you'll probably want to direct the output to another folder. To do this, simply set the outDir setting to the folder where you want the generated files. Then delete the generated demo.js and run the tsc command again. Once it's finished, I can see the file has now been created in the new build folder.
    ```ts
    "outDir": "build",
    ```
- If, however, you plan on using TypeScript only for its type checking ability, and will rely on another tool, such as the Babel compiler to transpile the final output, then an even better value for the target setting is esnext. This setting tells TypeScript to emit code that is compatible with whatever the latest version of JavaScript happens to be, which effectively just means that it should strip out all the type annotations and pass the rest of the code onto the other tools.
    ```ts
    "target": "ESNext",
    ```
- And finally, if you do plan on using TypeScript only for type checking and nothing more, it's also a good idea to set the noEmit setting to true, which tells TypeScript not to write out anything to disk at all. If I do this and then delete the generated folder, then run the tsc command again, I see that my type checking is working perfectly fine but no files are being generated anymore. Now that I have a basic TypeScript configuration in my project, it's time to move on and see what else it can do.
    ```ts
    "noEmit": true
    ```

summary: 
1. Add tsconfig.json file 
2. Within tsconfig.json file, add `include` options with the src folder and subfolder's path. 
3. Run with the command `tsc` 


# 1.3 Adding type checking to JavaScript files

- At this point, I've now shown you how to add TypeScript to your application and compile TypeScript files. However, one of my favorite things about TypeScript is that it is very easy to add to an existing application with existing JavaScript code. This is because TypeScript is a super set of JavaScript, which means that all JavaScript is valid TypeScript. If you open the exercise folder for this video, you'll see that I've added an example JavaScript file, app.js. To enable checking of existing JavaScript files, I'll simply add two additional settings to my tsconfig.json file. allowJs. And checkJs. And I'll set both of these options to true. Now, I'll run the TypeScript compiler and see what happens. 
- TypeScript found three errors in this new JavaScript file, errors that I planted in order to show how TypeScript can help you, even with JavaScript. I'm actually going to skip this first error: Cannot find dollar sign because it means that TypeScript doesn't know anything about the jQuery library I'm using and I'll show you how to fix that in the next video. The next two errors though show how TypeScript is able to look at my JavaScript code and see that I'm trying to reassign two properties to values that are a different type than they were previously assigned to. To see how it came to this conclusion, let's follow the code. 
- It starts on line 14 where I call the getContact method, which is defined on line one. And TypeScript can tell that this method returns an object with three properties: id, name and birthDate. And even more, it can tell that the id property is a number and the birthDate property is a date value. So when I go to reassign those properties to other types on lines 15 and 16, TypeScript lets me know that this is probably a mistake. Now, when I change them to the correct types, and run the compiler again, those errors go away. Now that I fixed some of the errors that were obvious to TypeScript, just based on its ability to infer type information, let's add some more information to allow it to detect even more issues and no, I don't mean converting this file to TypeScript by renaming it to .ts, I mean adding types to the JavaScript code using the industry standard JSDoc syntax. 
- The basic JSDoc syntax looks like this. True to its name, it's just a comment block but with some special syntax identified by the @ symbol. In this case, Visual Studio Code's auto complete has actually looked at my code and determined that this function that I'm documenting has a parameter named contactId and has defined its type in the braces as star, meaning it could be anything. However, if I change the star to number, which is what type I expect this parameter to be, I can now hover over the parameter and see that TypeScript has determined that this is indeed a number value. What's more, if we look down on line 24, I can also see that TypeScript has found another error in my code. 
- I'm trying to locate a contact using a string value rather than a number value for the contactId. Well, that's not correct. So I'll fix it. And I'll see that the error goes away. And that's just one of the dozen or so JSDoc keywords that you can use to tell TypeScript about your JavaScript code without actually converting your JavaScript files to TypeScript. In fact, you can mark up just about all of your JavaScript code like this. However, if you're going to go that route, I would just recommend taking the time to fully switch to TypeScript instead.


# 1.4 Importing third-party types

- In the previous video, I showed you how to use TypeScript to parse JavaScript files without actually converting them to full fledged TypeScript files. I also showed you how TypeScript found a few errors and I fixed most of those errors, but I left one, the one in which TypeScript warns me that it doesn't know what the dollar sign means, or rather, it's not aware of the jQuery library that I'm using here. 
- Since TypeScript has been around for quite some time now, you'll probably find the majority of the JavaScript libraries you use will already have TypeScript support built in, especially if you're installing them from the NPM package repository. However, it is likely that at some point you will run across a library that doesn't offer TypeScript support, particularly if you are migrating an older application or one with a lot of custom code. In these cases, you've got two options. You can create the type definitions yourself, or in the case of an open source library, you can install type definitions that others have created online, hosted in the Definitely Typed repository, which you can find at github.com/definitelytyped/definitelytyped. 
- Here, under the types folder, you'll find the type definitions for literally thousands of open source libraries. In fact, this list is so big, GitHub doesn't even show the whole thing at once. But don't worry, you don't have to search here because all of these folders are published as packages in the NPM package repository, npmjs.com. And this site is much easier to search. Simply search for @types and see what you find. In my case, I'm looking for jQuery, so I'll search for the @types jQuery package. Once I find what I'm looking for, I'll simply copy the command from the site, and execute it in the root folder of my project. Once this is done, you'll see that this command has downloaded the package from the NPM repository and extracted it to the node modules folder. And inside of that folder, there will be a types folder with a jQuery folder inside of that. 
- This folder contains all of the jQuery TypeScript definitions. The most important files will be the ones with the .d.ts extension, TypeScript declaration files. If I open the one named JQuery.d.ts, I'll see a bunch of relatively advanced TypeScript code mixed with some pretty impressive documentation. More importantly, if I switch back to my JavaScript file where TypeScript was previously complaining about the missing jQuery definitions, I can now see that not only is TypeScript no longer complaining, but I actually have really good auto complete and inline documentation to help me use the library. And that's how you import open source type definitions. Now, what about your own internal JavaScript libraries? Well, you'll be using the same .d.ts files. You'll just need to manually add them to your project yourself. I'm not going to lie. Writing these definitions from scratch can be quite daunting. Heck, it could be an entirely separate course. However, you could probably get a long way by simply taking a look at some of these publicly available definitions and copying from them and modifying them for yourself. It'll be a lot of work, but if you have JavaScript libraries that you use in a lot of different projects, it might just be worth it.
- https://github.com/definitelytyped/definitelytyped
- Go to https://www.npmjs.com/ and search with `@types jquery`
- Install Jquery `npm install --save @types/jquery`