# 3. Defining More Complex Types

## 3.1 Combining multiple types with union types

Type Alias

```ts
type ContactName = string;

// enum ContactStatus {
//     Active = "active",
//     Inactive = "inactive",
//     New = "new"
// }

type ContactStatus = "active" | "inactive" | "new";

type ContactBirthDate = Date | number | string;

interface Contact {
  id: number;
  name: ContactName;
  // birthDate?: Date | number | string;
  birthDate?: ContactBirthDate;
  status?: ContactStatus;
}

interface Address {
  line1: string;
  line2: string;
  province: string;
  region: string;
  postalCode: string;
}

type AddressableContact = Contact & Address;
// interface AddressableContact extends Contact, Address {}
function getBirthDate(contact: Contact) {
  if (typeof contact.birthDate === "number") {
    return new Date(contact.birthDate);
  } else if (typeof contact.birthDate === "string") {
    return Date.parse(contact.birthDate);
  } else {
    return contact.birthDate;
  }
}

let primaryContact: Contact = {
  id: 12345,
  name: "Jamie Johnson",
  status: "active",
};
```

## 3.2 Keyof operator

```ts
type ContactName = string;

type ContactStatus = "active" | "inactive" | "new";

type ContactBirthDate = Date | number | string;

interface Contact {
  id: number;
  name: ContactName;
  birthDate?: ContactBirthDate;
  status?: ContactStatus;
}

interface Address {
  line1: string;
  line2: string;
  province: string;
  region: string;
  postalCode: string;
}

let primaryContact: Contact = {
  id: 12345,
  name: "Jamie Johnson",
  status: "active",
};

type ContactFields = keyof Contact;
function getValue<T, U extends keyof T>(source: T, propertyName: U) {
  return source[propertyName];
}
const value = getValue({ min: 1, max: 200 }, "max");
```

## 3.3 Typeof operator

- I'm going to show you how to take advantage of a JavaScript feature that's been around for a long time, the typeof operator. If you've never used JavaScript's typeof operator, it looks like this. If I were to execute the code on lines one through four, I would see in the console, the word string and Boolean printed out because those are the types of the X and Y variables.
- Now, this is typical JavaScript behavior. It has nothing to do with type script. In fact, I've been writing JavaScript code like this for years. This is, once again, another example of using JavaScript's dynamic typing system to write very flexible logic. In this case, this function accepts a single parameter, named name or contact, the value of which, from what we can tell from the code, it expects to be either a string or a contact object, but here's the problem.
- We can understand, from looking at this code, that the parameter should be either a string or a contact value, but type script can't. So let's apply some static typing to this method signature Here, I've said that this function returns a contact type, and I've used a union type to indicate that it accepts either a string or a contact value as a parameter. When I do this, something interesting happens. Because type script now knows that the parameter can only be one of those two types, it can now make much smarter inferences, such as the fact that if the JavaScript typeof operator returns object, then the parameter must be a contact, or if it's something other than an object then the value must be a string value, but that's not all.
- Type script also allows you to use the typeof operator to define or determine static types dynamically. Consider the following example. First, I define a variable and assign it to a JavaScript object. I don't explicitly set this variable type, but type script is able to infer what it is nonetheless. That's great, but how do I refer to this same type later? Well, like this. With this code, I can make sure that any time someone tries to call this save function, the parameter that they passed must match the same structure as what I've defined on the myType variable on line 36. In all honesty, in most cases, (laughs) I would probably just elect to simply create an explicit interface or a type alias to address this situations but sometimes, using the typeof operator in this way is a helpful shortcut. However, this approach can be useful in that more dynamic code that you write when you're accepting values of types you don't actually know about until run time.

  ```ts
  const x = "string";
  const y = true;
  console.log(typeof x); // --> "string"
  console.log(typeof y); // --> "boolean"

  type ContactName = string;
  type ContactStatus = "active" | "inactive" | "new";
  type ContactBirthDate = Date | number | string;

  interface Contact {
    id: number;
    name: ContactName;
    birthDate?: ContactBirthDate;
    status?: ContactStatus;
  }

  function toContact(nameOrContact: string | Contact): Contact {
    if (typeof nameOrContact === "object") {
      return {
        id: nameOrContact.id,
        name: nameOrContact.name,
        status: nameOrContact.status,
      };
    } else {
      return {
        id: 0,
        name: nameOrContact,
        status: "active",
      };
    }
  }

  const myType = { min: 1, max: 200 };

  function save(source: typeof myType) {}
  ```

## 3.4 Indexed access types

- I'm going to show you how to determine the type of a certain property or multiple properties of a target object using something called an indexed access type. As its name implies, the syntax for an indexed access type is the same as the JavaScript syntax for accessing a property of an object using the index syntax like this.
- If I hover over the type, I can see that the type of Awesome matches the type of the id property on the Contact type, number. How is this useful? Well, take a look at line 19 where I have a property named contactId, which references the ID property of the contact type. Well, at least its name references the ID property but its type just happens to be the same. There's no direct connection between the two. So let's make one. While I haven't really changed the type of the contactId property here, I have done a much better job of showing my intention that this type should match the type of the ID property on the contact interface.
- I can do the same thing with these references to ContactStatus. Now, let's go back to our original example and explore a little deeper. Deeper into the object structure that is. Not only can I use this syntax to reference the type of properties, I can actually dig into the properties of those properties. For example, if I change the index to point to the address property of the contact type, which itself is a complex type, I can keep using the same syntax again to drill down into the address type, like when I choose the postalCode property, I can see that the Awesome type now matches the postalCode type, string.
- Now let's turn our attention to the getValue method here on line 36. But first, let me change what this function does just a little bit. Take a look at the handful of contact event interfaces I've defined here. I've also collected all these types into yet another type called ContactEvents, which you can think of as one place to find all of the events having to do with a contact. With that in mind, I'm going to change the getValue method not to read a value from an object but execute a method. Just bear with me. Okay, I lied. I'm not going to use that getValue method at all. But I lied for a good reason. You see, I know this looks pretty complex but hopefully, it'll be a little easier to digest since you watched me convert the method I already explained.
- Whether you're mad at me or not, let's go through this. First, I define a generic type T using the key of constraint like I showed in the earlier video. Then I use this generic type as the type of the first parameter to the method, eventName. In other words, this parameter will accept a string containing the name of any of the properties you can find on the ContactEvents type, deleted, StatusChanged, et cetera. Then comes the interesting part. The second parameter here is a function, which accepts a single parameter and that parameter matches the type of the property indicated by the first parameter, eventName.
- To really appreciate it and actually make sense of what I just said, you really have to see it in action. Here I've called the method and asked to handle the statusChanged eventName. This is nothing new. You've seen this already. The magic comes in the second parameter. Notice how TypeScript has determined the type of this event parameter is ContactStatusChangedEvent, even though I didn't specify it in this call. That's because I used index access of the ContactEvents type to figure it out on its own. And of course, TypeScript is also smart enough to figure out the types inside the method as well.
- Here I've handled the statusChanged event whose handler expects a ContactStatusChangedEvent, however, the code I've written tries to pass the handler a ContactDeletedEvent, which is not correct, so TypeScript yells at me. However, the moment I provide an object that matches the correct ContactStatusChangedEvent interface, TypeScript is happy and those errors go away. Hopefully you can see now that even though it may have seemed like a somewhat trivial syntax, the indexed access typing technique can actually help produce really advanced and powerful type checking.

  ```ts
  type ContactStatus = "active" | "inactive" | "new";

  interface Address {
    street: string;
    province: string;
    postalCode: string;
  }

  interface Contact {
    id: number;
    name: string;
    status: ContactStatus;
    address: Address;
  }

  type Awesome = Contact["address"]["postalCode"];

  interface ContactEvent {
    contactId: Contact["id"];
  }

  interface ContactDeletedEvent extends ContactEvent {}

  interface ContactStatusChangedEvent extends ContactEvent {
    oldStatus: Contact["status"];
    newStatus: Contact["status"];
  }

  interface ContactEvents {
    deleted: ContactDeletedEvent;
    statusChanged: ContactStatusChangedEvent;
    // ... and so on
  }

  function getValue<T, U extends keyof T>(source: T, propertyName: U) {
    return source[propertyName];
  }

  function handleEvent<T extends keyof ContactEvents>(
    eventName: T,
    handler: (evt: ContactEvents[T]) => void
  ) {
    if (eventName === "statusChanged") {
      handler({ contactId: 1, oldStatus: "active", newStatus: "inactive" });
    }
  }

  handleEvent("statusChanged", (evt) => evt);
  ```

## 3.5 Defining dynamic but limited types with records

- Way back in the beginning of the course, I showed you how to use the any type to make TypeScript revert back to JavaScript's dynamic and unpredictable behavior of dealing with types. It's particularly useful in dealing with situations like this, where you want to extend an object with properties that don't exist on the type that TypeScript originally inferred from the initialization of the variable on line one. In this case, just add any, and TypeScript is happy to stop yelling at you and let you go back to manipulating the object however you want. The problem is that taking this approach is effectively opting out of type safety altogether.
- In other words, describing a variable with the any type means it can quite literally be anything and TypeScript will never get upset. I generally try to avoid using the any keyword whenever possible.
- In fact, there's a TypeScript configuration setting which allows you to trigger a compile error whenever any is applied. One alternative that you can use to still retain some of the flexibility and dynamicism of the any type is the record type. The record type is a very flexible type definition that allows you to define some structure and even some typing, without having to detail every possible property of the type you're trying to describe.
- The record syntax is very simple. It's a generic syntax with two generic parameters. The first parameter is the possible property values, while the second is the possible property types. For example, I can define a record with string properties and string values, like this. Note that my initialization continues to work just fine because the property name, name, is a valid string and it's assigned to a string value. If I try to assign one of these properties to a numeric value, however, TypeScript tells me that number is not assignable to string. It didn't have a problem with the property name I used.
- Number is a perfectly valid string value. However, it doesn't like that I'm trying to assign a numeric value to this property since I've only defined string values in my list of accepted property types. That's fine. I could just use a union to add number to that list. And then that error goes away too. And I can do the same with additional types as well. For example, I can add a boolean valued property and a function valued one too. And then add those types to the list of accepted types and watch the errors go away.
- Notice that other errors like when I try to assign the X variable to some completely different type are still very much there and still very legitimate warnings. I don't want to be able to assign X to some other type of value. Now that we've made the property types dynamic, let's take a look at the property names themselves.
- Say I have this function that accepts an array of contact objects and a query object on which each property on the query object matches the name of a property on the contact type and contains metadata to filter the contacts by. This function iterates through the properties of each contact and compares them to a filter defined on the property with a matching name on the query object, if there is one. For instance, the contacts name property is compared with the name property on the query object. An example call to this method is shown below, right here. Now how can record help in this scenario? First I'll use the record syntax that I already showed, in order to define an object who can have properties of any name, but all of those properties values must be a query object.
- Honestly, this is really great and we could probably stop right here but let's make it specific to the properties on contact but let's limit the properties of the query object to the properties on the contact object by using our old friend, the keyof operator. And I can see as soon as I do this, TypeScript warns me that phone number is not a valid property on contact. So I'll remove it and now TypeScript yells at me with this not so straightforward error that I haven't provided a value for every property of the contact type.
- I'll get back to that later. The next thing I need to do is cast the call to object keys to the same type because for some reason, TypeScript is not yet smart enough to infer that. Once I do that, I can see that TypeScript can now infer that the type of the property query object is query, which means that matches must be a function. From these examples, I hope that I've proven just how simple and useful the record type can be in replacing the majority of places where you might otherwise give up and use the any type instead. And don't worry, I'll show you how to fix this error in another video.

  ```ts
  let x: Record<string, string | number | boolean | Function> = {
    name: "Wruce Bayne",
  };
  x.number = 1234;
  x.active = true;
  x.log = () => console.log("awesome!");

  ////////////////////

  type ContactStatus = "active" | "inactive" | "new";

  interface Address {
    street: string;
    province: string;
    postalCode: string;
  }

  interface Contact {
    id: number;
    name: string;
    status: ContactStatus;
    address: Address;
  }

  interface Query {
    sort?: "asc" | "desc";
    matches(val): boolean;
  }

  function searchContacts(
    contacts: Contact[],
    query: Record<keyof Contact, Query>
  ) {
    return contacts.filter((contact) => {
      for (const property of Object.keys(contact) as (keyof Contact)[]) {
        // get the query object for this property
        const propertyQuery = query[property];
        // check to see if it matches
        if (propertyQuery && propertyQuery.matches(contact[property])) {
          return true;
        }
      }

      return false;
    });
  }

  const filteredContacts = searchContacts(
    [
      /* contacts */
    ],
    {
      id: { matches: (id) => id === 123 },
      name: { matches: (name) => name === "Carol Weaver" },
    }
  );
  ```
