#  4. Extending and Extracting Metadata from Existing Types
## 4.1 Extending and modifying existing types

- In a previous video, I left you hanging with a type script error that was caused by using the record type to define a query object whose properties were limited to the properties of the same name on the contact type. Now, that worked great to find the property that I previously had defined, which didn't match any of the properties on the contact type. 
- Once I removed that property, however, I faced a new problem. Type script is now yelling at me that I haven't provided values for all of the properties of the contact type. The real problem here, though, is I don't think that this is a problem. I want to choose only a subset of those contact type properties in this query object. 
- In this video, I'll show you a few utility types that allow you to extend from existing types, like record, but pick and choose which properties you want to include and exclude in your new type. First up, let's solve this current problem using the partial helper type. The partial helper type is a generic type. 
- So I'll use it to wrap my existing record-based type using this syntax. Notice how the error at the bottom immediately went away when I applied the partial type. This is because the partial helper type creates a new type that looks exactly like the type it wraps, but with all of its properties defined as optional. This means that you can define as many or as few of them, as you wish. In other words, now if I want to query only the ID and name properties and no other properties, like I'm doing on line 49 and 50, I can only define query objects for those specific properties.
-  What if I want to do the opposite, however, and restrict the usage of certain properties. For example, what if I don't ever want to allow queries on the address property of the contact class. Well, there's another helper for that. And it's called omit. Like partial, the omit helper is a generic type that wraps another type and copies that type's definition, but, like its name suggests, it allows you to omit certain properties from that cloned definition. Unlike partial, however, the omit helper requires a second generic parameter, the list of property names that you'd like to omit. 
- For example, in order to omit the address property from this definition, I'd simply add it as the second generic parameter. And now I can see that it's no longer in the list of available properties. Of course, I can list as many properties as I like using a union type. With this definition in place, I can see that my contact query type now has only two possible properties, ID and name, and neither the address nor the status properties are available. 
- And both of the remaining properties are optional due to the whole thing being wrapped in the partial helper. In this example, omit is being used to exclude certain properties, leaving me with only a few. This means as new properties are added to the wrapped type, the contact type, in this example, those new properties also become part of this new type. If that's not what I wanted, if I wanted to limit this type to only the ID and name properties, no matter what other properties get added to the contact type, I can use yet another helper named pick. As its name implies, pick is the opposite of omit. 
- It creates a new type using only the properties named by its second generic parameter. In this example, I've limited the allowable fields to only ID and name, no matter what new fields may get added to the contact type in the future. And, finally, one last useful utility type is the required type, which is the opposite of the partial helper, turning all properties of a type to required properties, instead of optional. Here, I've used the required type to wrap the contact query type that I've been demonstrating. And see that it has inherited the same properties as the contact query type, only those properties are now all required, instead of optional. I use these utility types all the time, especially the partial type, to quickly make new types based on existing ones, but modifying them slightly in order to make their properties optional or remove those properties all together. I expect these types will make plenty of appearances in your TypeScript code, as well.
    ```ts
    let x: Record<string, string | number | boolean | Function> = { name: "Wruce Bayne" }
    x.number = 1234
    x.active = true
    x.log = () => console.log("awesome!")


    ////////////////////

    type ContactStatus = "active" | "inactive" | "new";

    interface Address {
        street: string;
        province: string;
        postalCode: string;
    }

    interface Contact {
        id: number;
        name: string;
        status: ContactStatus;
        address: Address;
        email: string;
    }

    interface Query {
        sort?: 'asc' | 'desc';
        matches(val): boolean;
    }

    type ContactQuery = 
        Partial<
            Pick<
                Record<keyof Contact, Query>,
                "id" | "name"
            >
        >

    type RequiredContactQuery = Required<ContactQuery>

    function searchContacts(contacts: Contact[], query: ContactQuery) {
        return contacts.filter(contact => {
            for (const property of Object.keys(contact) as (keyof Contact)[]) {
                // get the query object for this property
                const propertyQuery = query[property];
                // check to see if it matches
                if (propertyQuery && propertyQuery.matches(contact[property])) {
                    return true;
                }
            }

            return false;
        })
    }

    const filteredContacts = searchContacts(
        [/* contacts */],
        {
            id: { matches: (id) => id === 123 },
            name: { matches: (name) => name === "Carol Weaver" },
        }
    );
    ```

## 4.2 Extracting metadata from existing types

- In the previous video, I introduced you to the record utility type, which allows you to construct a new type by referencing the fields of another type. Defining new types like this is an incredibly useful technique and using the record type to define them is a quick and easy way to create simple references, like the one I've created here. 
- However, more often than not, the new type you're looking to create is more complex than what's shown here and in those cases, I like to use a different syntax called a mapped type. In its basic form, a mapped type definition looks like this. This mapped type definition uses a property indexer syntax, the open and close brackets, in conjunction with the key of syntax I used in the record based example, in order to enumerate all of the keys of the contact type. 
- In other words, this example completely duplicates the previous type alias that used the record syntax, complete with the question mark at the end to make all of the mapped properties optional. The reason I like the mapped type syntax better, however, is that while it does make the simple definitions like this one, look a little more complex, it actually allows you to make more complex definitions much more readable. For instance, one of my all time favorite uses of this approach is to use the name of the key that I'm referencing to make one boiler plate line of code that adapts to each target property. 
- Let me show you what I mean. Let's revisit this query type that I created a while back, specifically, the type of parameter that gets passed into the matches method on line 19. Without an explicit type, TypeScript infers this parameter to be the any type. But remember, we want to avoid any wherever possible. So let's convert this to a generic type. And use that new generic type as the parameter type for the matches method. Once that's complete, I can go back to my mapped type to take advantage of this new generic parameter and pass the type of the mapped property like this. 
- In order to explain what I just did, let me show you the resulting type. A mapped type where not only have all of the property names of the source type, contact in this case, been copied over but I've been able to reference the types of those properties as well. I did that using the same property index or syntax that I would use to access a value of an instance on the contact type, the open and close brackets. Why is all of this useful? Well, now I've got full static typing in my query objects. 
- For example, when I provide a query function for the ID property, the query functions generic type parameter is number, the same type as the contact IDs property. Likewise, the parameter type of the query object for the name property is a string, the same as the contacts name property that it was originally mapped from. You may have noticed that TypeScript is now complaining that it can't adequately predict the type of value that will be retrieved when we iterate through these properties on line 34. 
- I can fix that issue by telling it that it will be some kind of type from one of the properties on contact but it doesn't need to care about which one. Now that it's all working, you might be thinking that this approach seems a little complicated or advanced or maybe a little overkill. However, I find using mapped types in this way to be one of the most useful techniques to fill those static typing gaps where I might otherwise find myself defaulting back to the any type. I expect you'll be surprised at how often this will come in useful to you as well.


    ```ts
    type ContactStatus = "active" | "inactive" | "new";

    interface Address {
        street: string;
        province: string;
        postalCode: string;
    }

    interface Contact {
        id: number;
        name: string;
        status: ContactStatus;
        address: Address;
        email: string;
    }

    interface Query<TProp> {
        sort?: 'asc' | 'desc';
        matches(val: TProp): boolean;
    }

    //type ContactQuery = Partial<Record<keyof Contact, Query>>;

    type ContactQuery = {
        [TProp in keyof Contact]?: Query<Contact[TProp]>
    }

    function searchContacts(contacts: Contact[], query: ContactQuery) {
        return contacts.filter(contact => {
            for (const property of Object.keys(contact) as (keyof Contact)[]) {
                // get the query object for this property
                const propertyQuery = query[property] as Query<Contact[keyof Contact]>;
                // check to see if it matches
                if (propertyQuery && propertyQuery.matches(contact[property])) {
                    return true;
                }
            }

            return false;
        })
    }

    const filteredContacts = searchContacts(
        [/* contacts */],
        {
            id: { matches: (id) => id === 123 },
            name: { matches: (name) => name === "Carol Weaver" },
        }
    );
    ```

## Challenge & Solution

- For this challenge, I asked you to implement the same scenario that I've been showing you for the past two chapters, and to try to do it without going back to see what I've done in those videos. Now, I'm going to show you two ways to solve this problem. The first solution is simpler and easier to implement, but it doesn't actually solve the problem in its entirety. Regardless, it's worth showing. So I'll start with it. That solution I'm talking about is to use a record type, like this. 
- This gives me the ability to create a record object whose property names match those of the target object. Then I can define the type for the query function. The thing that checks the value of the property, like this. And that's the end of that solution. Sure it works, but it only gets me part of the way there. This still says that the type of this name property can either be a string or a number, but that's just not true. I know it's only a string, so let's take another pass. 
- This time, instead of using a record object, I use an indexed accessor type, like this. First I define the name of the property. I'll use key of T to limit it to only property names that exist on the type T. Then I'll give this property name a generic type name. And use that as the type of the parameter in the query function for this field. And finally, since I don't want this object to require a query for every property of the target object, I'll make the property optional, like this. 
- And that's it. I've got my fully typed query object. Now, the reason this works better than the record solution, is simply because with this approach, I'm defining each individual property rather than the whole object at once. So the value of T prop will be the name of the property on the left side. And I can use that same property name to figure out the type of that property on the right side. 
- Now, if you had trouble with this solution, don't be concerned. These concepts are pretty hard to get the first time around. Try reviewing the past two chapters to really understand what is going on in this solution. And then come back and try it again. It may seem like a lot of effort to learn this, but trust me when I say it's worth it. These are the kinds of types that will really bring your static type checking to the next level, and catch many more of those hard to find bugs before they get shipped into production.
    ```ts
    function query<T>(
        items: T[],
        query: {
            [TProp in keyof T]?: (val: T[TProp]) => boolean
        }
    ) {
        return items.filter(item => {
            // iterate through each of the item's properties
            for (const property of Object.keys(item)) {

                // get the query for this property name
                const propertyQuery = query[property]

                // see if this property value matches the query
                if (propertyQuery && propertyQuery(item[property])) {
                    return true
                }
            }

            // nothing matched so return false
            return false
        })
    }

    const matches = query(
        [
            { name: "Ted", age: 12 },
            { name: "Angie", age: 31 }
        ],
        {
            name: name => name === "Angie",
            age: age => age > 30
        })
    ```