# 5 Adding Dynamic Behavior with Decorators

## 5.1 What are decorators and why are they helpful?

- In this chapter, I'm going to show how to use an incredibly powerful type-script feature named decorators. The easiest way to understand decorators is to think of them as metadata that you can add to your classes, methods and even, getter and setter properties. In fact, you can add far more than just information.
- You can actually extend these elements with additional behavior, allowing you to add that behavior to your code without actually changing your code. The typical example of decorators in action is a logging decorator. Let me show you. This example class has logging statements at the beginning and end of each function.
- This helps diagnose problems more quickly because you can determine which functions have run and whether or not they completed. It also features a mechanism that protects the method from being called by users who don't have proper access. Though this is the behavior that we want, there are a few things that are less than ideal about this code the way that it's written now.
- First off, this has a decent amount of duplicated code. Next, it's tedious to write, not to mention error prone, considering the fact that developers are required to type the method name free hand and finally, this logging and auditing code is an auxiliary function. It doesn't actually have anything to do with the actual purpose and function of these methods, which is to save and retrieve contacts in this case.
- In other words, it's just noise. This scenario, however, is a perfect opportunity to apply decorators to both centralize and simplify this code. For example, what if we could just write this and then eliminate the logging statements? and this and eliminate access control statements? Doesn't this code look so much cleaner and easier to read? Plus, it has the added benefit of being able to easily change how and where those log and audit entries are stored. Plus, it has the added benefit of being able to easily change how and where those log entries are stored or how we apply our authorization logic.
- These are exactly the kinds of scenarios where decorators shine, and in this chapter, I'll show you how to create these decorators. Before I continue, however, I must warn you that decorators are actually a proposed addition to the JavaScript language itself, and as this proposal evolves, it's final implementation may actually begin to differ from typescripts implementation.
- If you're worried about writing code that may conflict with a future JavaScript standard, then you may want to simply view this chapter to learn what decorators can do but wait to implement the techniques in your own code until the standard has been finalized. If, however, you trust that type script will support you in writing code that will at least compile to JavaScript compatible code, then by all means, please continue on. I certainly use decorators in my code.
- In order to really make this point clear, type script, (chuckles) actually encourages developers to opt in to decorator support via a configuration setting. So be sure to do that right now. Simply, open up your tsconfig file and set the experimentalDecorator settings to true. There's also one more thing, which is not technically required to use decorators, but it's a really valuable tool, and that is runtime metadata.
- I'll explain exactly what this is in later videos, but while we're here, let's go ahead and add support for it, so it will be available to us later. To enable it, you'll first need to set another setting, emitDecoratorMetadata, to true, and then you'll need to install the reflect-metadata library like so.
- This library implements polyfills for another set of proposed ECMAScript features, which are considered experimental now, but should hopefully be approved and implemented around the same time that decorators become widely available and now, with all this code in place, continue on to the next video where I'll show you how to create your first decorator.
  ```ts
  interface Contact {
    id: number;
  }

    const currentUser = {
    id: 1234,
    roles: ["ContactEditor"],
    isInRole(role: string): boolean {
    return this.roles.contains(role);
    }
    }

    @log
    class ContactRepository {
    private contacts: Contact[] = [];

        @authorize("ContactViewer")
        getContactById(id: number): Contact | null {
            const contact = this.contacts.find(x => x.id === id);

            return contact;
        }

        @authorize("ContactEditor")
        save(contact: Contact): void {
            const existing = this.getContactById(contact.id);

            if (existing) {
                Object.assign(existing, contact);
            } else {
                this.contacts.push(contact);
            }
        }

    }
    ```
## 5.2 Creating a method decorator

- The best way to learn how to create a decorator, in my opinion, is with a method decorator. As I find it the most straightforward to understand and implement. As its name implies, a method decorator is a decorator that you apply to a method on line 19 and 29. Implementing a method decorator is as simple as writing a function that looks like this. This function gets executed at runtime and accepts three parameters. The first parameter target is the object that the decorator is being applied to. 
- In the case of a method decorator, it is the instance of the object that the method belongs to. The second parameter property is the name of the property that the decorator is applied to. And finally, the third parameter descriptor is an object containing the current metadata about the property. Now, this descriptor object is actually the same for any property of any object, regular fields, getter setters, and methods. In the case of a method, however, this value property will be the one we're most interested in because its value is the function that is executed when the method is called. When creating a method decorator, you have two options to modify the behavior of the method. 
- The first option is to simply edit the descriptor in place like this. This approach leaves the existing descriptor in place and just modifies its properties. The second option to return a brand new descriptor object like this. Once returned, type scripts will replace the method's current descriptor with this new one. Now, neither approach is inherently better than the other. 
- It's mostly just a matter of style and the current problem you're trying to solve. Now, let's get back to our example, implementing this authorized decorator, which throws an exception when the user is not authorized to access a method. To do this, I'm going to replace the descriptor's value property with a new function. And I'll start this function by checking to see if the user is authenticated. 
- And if not, we'll throw an error. This is the new logic that we want to add to the method, but keep in mind that this new function completely overwrites the current method. So we still need to execute the original logic. To do this, I'll make a copy of the current method before I overwrite it. And then, I'll simply call that function from within my new function, using the apply approach. And that's it, we've wrapped the methods logic with our own. Here is where you can really your imagination run wild with what you can do in this code. 
- For example, you can wrap every method call in a try-catch block, and automatically log every exception that occurs, but still not affect the way the application behaves. Now that the decorator is ready, we can apply it to whatever methods we like using the syntax I showed in the previous video. With this in place, our decorator now guarantees that users are authenticated in order to access these methods. Otherwise, an error is thrown. However, you may notice that this is not actually a drop in replacement for the code that I had here before. 
- This code checks not only that the user is just authenticated, but that they actually belong to a particular role. In order to implement this behavior, we're going to need to add a parameter to our decorator so that we can pass in the role that should be checked. Head onto the next video, where I'll show you how to do exactly that.

    ```ts
    interface Contact {
        id: number;
    }

    const currentUser = {
        id: 1234,
        roles: ["ContactEditor"],
        isAuthenticated(): boolean {
            return true
        },
        isInRole(role: string): boolean {
            return this.roles.contains(role);
        }
    }

    function authorize(target: any, property: string, descriptor: PropertyDescriptor) {
        const wrapped = descriptor.value

        descriptor.value = function () {
            if (!currentUser.isAuthenticated()) {
                throw Error("User is not authenticated");
            }

            try {
                return wrapped.apply(this, arguments);
            } catch (ex) {
                // TODO: some fancy logging logic here
                throw ex;
            }
        }
    }

    class ContactRepository {
        private contacts: Contact[] = [];

        @authorize("ContactViewer")
        getContactById(id: number): Contact | null {
            if (!currentUser.isInRole("ContactViewer")) {
                throw Error("User not authorized to execute this action");
            }

            const contact = this.contacts.find(x => x.id === id);
            return contact;
        }

        @authorize("ContactEditor")
        save(contact: Contact): void {
            const existing = this.getContactById(contact.id);

            if (existing) {
                Object.assign(existing, contact);
            } else {
                this.contacts.push(contact);
            }
        }
    }
    ```
## 5.3 Creating decorator factories

- In the previous video, I showed you how to create a method decorator to wrap a methods functionality. And I used this authorized decorator to demonstrate. I also pointed out, however, that this implementation didn't allow us to pass in any parameters, such as which role we expect the user to have, like the existing code does. The problem is that a decorator must have the signature that my example decorator currently has with the target property and descriptor parameters. 
- How then do we pass in a custom parameter like I want to do here? By wrapping the decorator definition in another function called a decorator factory. As its name implies, a decorator factory is a function that creates decorators. In other words, our current decorator definition now becomes the return value of another function, like this. With this wrapper in place, we are now free to define whatever signature we like, including whichever custom parameters we want.
- For example, I can now add the name of the user role that I want to ensure the user belongs to. The decorator function within this factory can then access these parameters in its logic like this. With this decorator and factory in place, that code that I showed in the beginning will now work just fine, accepting the role that I'd like to check for, or allowing me to add any other custom parameters in logic I might want to add in the future.

    ```ts
    interface Contact {
        id: number;
    }

    const currentUser = {
        id: 1234,
        roles: ["ContactEditor"],
        isAuthenticated(): boolean {
            return true
        },
        isInRole(role: string): boolean {
            return this.roles.contains(role);
        }
    }

    function authorize(role: string) {
        return function authorizeDecorator(target: any, property: string, descriptor: PropertyDescriptor) {
            const wrapped = descriptor.value

            descriptor.value = function () {
                if (!currentUser.isAuthenticated()) {
                    throw Error("User is not authenticated");
                }
                if (!currentUser.isInRole(role)) {
                    throw Error(`User not in role ${role}`);
                }

                return wrapped.apply(this, arguments);
            }
        }
    }

    class ContactRepository {
        private contacts: Contact[] = [];

        @authorize("ContactViewer")
        getContactById(id: number): Contact | null {
            const contact = this.contacts.find(x => x.id === id);
            return contact;
        }

        @authorize("ContactEditor")
        save(contact: Contact): void {
            const existing = this.getContactById(contact.id);

            if (existing) {
                Object.assign(existing, contact);
            } else {
                this.contacts.push(contact);
            }
        }
    }
    ```
## 5.4 Creating a class decorator

- Now that I've shown the fundamentals of how decorators and decorator factories work with methods, I'll show you how to apply decorators to classes. At a high level, the approach is pretty much the same. For example, if I wanted to create a decorator to freeze a class to prevent any changes, I can create a function that accepts a single parameter with the function type like this. (keyboard keys tapping) And we apply the decorator to the class by placing it just before the class definition like this. 
- So far, so good. It is the same familiar syntax that is used to create method decorators. The biggest difference, however, is what is actually being decorated. In other words, what exactly is the target that this parameter references? As the function type implies, the target being passed to the class decorator is not the object being created when the class is instantiated. 
- Instead, it's the class's constructor function. In other words, you can think of it more like this. (keyboard keys tapping) With that in mind, let's actually change the name of the parameter, just to be really clear what it is. (keyboard keys tapping) I can now implement this decorator by calling the object.freeze method to freeze the constructor so that it cannot be modified after it's defined. 
- (keyboard keys tapping) We'll also want to freeze its prototype as well. And that's it. We've now created a class decorator to modify the class's constructor function. To be honest, however, I've never had the need to modify a constructor function with a class decorator. Most of the time, I use class decorators to dynamically add properties or behaviors to a class at runtime. 
- To do that, we take a slightly different approach in our class decorator. And instead of modifying the constructor function as it's passed in, we actually return a brand new class. It looks like this. Let me create a new decorator named singleton. (keyboard keys tapping) And for the type of the constructor parameter, I'm going to use any for right now. 
- I'll come back to that later. Then I'm going to simply use the standard class syntax to define a brand new class that derives from the one that was passed in. (keyboard keys tapping) And then I'll simply return that new class. And that's it. I've now dynamically redefined the decorated class by creating and returning a whole new class behind the scenes. While this new class is technically not exactly the same as the one that was passed in, it does extend the class that was passed in. So it still retains all of the original class's members and behaviors. Once this code is in place, I can do whatever I want, such as create a static property. 
- (keyboard keys tapping) Or add behavior to the constructor, such as checking to make sure that only one instance of this class has been instantiated. To do this, I'll add the basic constructor, which calls the base class's constructor via the super method. (keyboard keys tapping) But because this decorator can be applied to any class, and we don't know what, if any, parameters that target constructor might have. So we'll use the spread operator to accept any and all parameters being passed into the original constructor. And pass them right on to the base constructor. With this in place, I can finally add my custom logic. 
- First, I'll check to see whether another instance of this class has been created. (keyboard keys tapping) If another instance has been created, I'll throw an exception. (keyboard keys tapping) Otherwise I'll save a reference to the newly constructed instance at the end of the constructor, so that I'll be able to check for it next time. (keyboard keys tapping) And that's it, a fully implemented example of a class decorator. Before we end this video though, let's go back and fix the constructor parameter type, if only because I try to avoid the any type whenever possible. 
- The reason I originally converted this to the any type was because the function type just wasn't going to work. TypeScript won't let you create a new class that derives from a regular function. Instead, we need to use a generic type definition that describes the special behavior of a constructor function, which looks like this. (keyboard keys tapping) I won't get into the detailed explanation of this generic type, except to scroll down to where we've used our singleton class decorator. (keyboard keys tapping) And see that the absence of compilation errors shows that it's exactly the type that TypeScript was looking for.

    ```ts
    interface Contact {
        id: number;
    }

    const currentUser = {
        id: 1234,
        roles: ["ContactEditor"],
        isAuthenticated(): boolean {
            return true
        },
        isInRole(role: string): boolean {
            return this.roles.contains(role);
        }
    }

    function authorize(role: string) {
        return function authorizeDecorator(target: any, property: string, descriptor: PropertyDescriptor) {
            const wrapped = descriptor.value

            descriptor.value = function () {
                if (!currentUser.isAuthenticated()) {
                    throw Error("User is not authenticated");
                }
                if (!currentUser.isInRole(role)) {
                    throw Error(`User not in role ${role}`);
                }

                return wrapped.apply(this, arguments);
            }
        }
    }

    function freeze(constructor: Function) {
        Object.freeze(constructor)
        Object.freeze(constructor.prototype)
    }

    function singleton<T extends { new(...args: any[]): {} }>(constructor: T) {
        return class Singleton extends constructor {
            static _instance = null;

            constructor(...args) {
                super(...args);
                if (Singleton._instance) {
                    throw Error("Duplicate instance")
                }

                Singleton._instance = this
            }
        }
    }

    @freeze
    @singleton
    class ContactRepository {
        private contacts: Contact[] = [];

        @authorize("ContactViewer")
        getContactById(id: number): Contact | null {
            const contact = this.contacts.find(x => x.id === id);
            return contact;
        }

        @authorize("ContactEditor")
        save(contact: Contact): void {
            const existing = this.getContactById(contact.id);

            if (existing) {
                Object.assign(existing, contact);
            } else {
                this.contacts.push(contact);
            }
        }
    }
    ```
## 5.5 Creating a property decorator

- So far in this chapter, I've shown you how to create method decorators and class decorators. In this video, I'm going to show you about the third kind of decorator, the property decorator. As its name implies, property decorators are decorators that are applied to properties of a class, like the context property of our contact repository example, and you apply a decorator to a property the same way you apply one to a class or a method like this. 
- Here, I'm applying a decorator called auditable, which I'll create in a minute, to the contacts property. The implementation of this decorator will log a message to the console anytime the value of this property has changed. Since methods are just properties of a class that happen to be functions, the definition of a property decorator looks very much like a method decorator, a function that accepts two parameters, the target and the property name. 
- And just like the method decorator, these two parameters correspond to the instance of the target object that is being decorated and the name of the property being decorated. Now that I've defined the decorator function, let's implement it. To do so, I'm going to use the object.define property API to easily define getter and setter functionality on this property. 
- The short explanation of this code is that first, I save the initial value of the property on line 55, then overwrite the property with a custom getter and setter using the object.define property starting on line 58. In the custom setter on line 60, I log a message to the console on line 61 anytime the property value is changed. Unfortunately, a more in-depth explanation of the define property API and its pros and cons is outside of the scope of this course, which is, quite frankly, why I saved this video for last. 
- Most of the property decorators I make end up looking almost exactly like this. However, I highly encourage you to get a solid understanding of JavaScript properties and the define property API before trying to do anything too advanced in a property decorator. Despite this warning, however, I do still encourage you to use property decorators to make your properties far more dynamic than just saving and retrieving their values.

    ```ts
    interface Contact {
        id: number;
    }

    const currentUser = {
        id: 1234,
        roles: ["ContactEditor"],
        isAuthenticated(): boolean {
            return true
        },
        isInRole(role: string): boolean {
            return this.roles.contains(role);
        }
    }

    function authorize(role: string) {
        return function authorizeDecorator(target: any, property: string, descriptor: PropertyDescriptor) {
            const wrapped = descriptor.value

            descriptor.value = function () {
                if (!currentUser.isAuthenticated()) {
                    throw Error("User is not authenticated");
                }
                if (!currentUser.isInRole(role)) {
                    throw Error(`User not in role ${role}`);
                }

                return wrapped.apply(this, arguments);
            }
        }
    }

    function freeze(constructor: Function) {
        Object.freeze(constructor)
        Object.freeze(constructor.prototype)
    }

    function singleton<T extends { new(...args: any[]): {} }>(constructor: T) {
        return class Singleton extends constructor {
            static _instance = null;

            constructor(...args) {
                super(...args);
                if (Singleton._instance) {
                    throw Error("Duplicate instance")
                }

                Singleton._instance = this
            }
        }
    }

    function auditable(target: object, key: string | symbol) {
        // get the initial value, before the decorator is applied
        let val = target[key];

        // then overwrite the property with a custom getter and setter
        Object.defineProperty(target, key, {
            get: () => val,
            set: (newVal) => {
                console.log(`${key.toString()} changed: `, newVal);
                val = newVal;
            },
            enumerable: true,
            configurable: true
        })
    }

    @freeze
    @singleton
    class ContactRepository {
        @auditable
        private contacts: Contact[] = [];

        @authorize("ContactViewer")
        getContactById(id: number): Contact | null {
            const contact = this.contacts.find(x => x.id === id);
            return contact;
        }

        @authorize("ContactEditor")
        save(contact: Contact): void {
            const existing = this.getContactById(contact.id);

            if (existing) {
                Object.assign(existing, contact);
            } else {
                this.contacts.push(contact);
            }
        }
    }
    ```

